JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
Helping children distinguish
between false information and
fact-based news, it's a
distinction increasingly
a problem for adults.
And, to be clear, we're
referring to false information
disguised as a legitimate news
story, not reporting that
people dislike for political
reasons and label fake news.
In Washington state,
educators and media literacy
advocates have joined
together with legislators
to address the problem.
Special correspondent Kavitha
Cardoza with our partner
Education Week traveled there
recently.
It's part of our weekly
series Making the Grade.
NIAMH O'CONNELL, Teacher:
This was the front page of The
Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Niamh O'Connell
third grade history class at
Bertschi School is analyzing
old news stories, looking
for evidence of bias.
STUDENT: People, if they don't
know how to analyze it, will
just say, oh, wow, that's
true.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Fred Coddon
(ph) looks at the choice of
words used in a story about
Japanese internment camps
during World War II.
STUDENT: Notice how they're
wording it Japanese, instead
of Japanese-Americans?
NIAMH O'CONNELL: What
was the purpose of that?
Why do they do that?
STUDENT: The purpose was to
say, oh, we're not imprisoning
American citizens, or, as
they put it, we're not
evacuating American citizens.
We're evacuating Japanese.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: And why do
they use the word evacuate?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Another student
also notices the language.
WILL PARSONS, Student: I saw
some fake advertising for the
Japanese internment camps.
They said they were
assembly centers.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: So they kind
of made it seem really cool,
and, actually, it wasn't?
WILL PARSONS: Yes.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: O'Connell
uses examples from the past, so
these kids can become smarter
about media messages in
the present, even though
they're only 8 years old.
STUDENT: I want to learn how
to like analyze it myself
and have my own opinion.
NIAMH O'CONNELL: They soak
up everything around them.
I think it's important for
kids to be able to control the
interpretations that they hear
and see every day, instead
of the interpretations
maybe controlling them.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Recognizing
bias in news stories is
one form of media literacy.
Spotting when the news
is entirely fabricated,
like these stories, is
something else entirely.
Often, these stories are
designed to look as if
they come from legitimate
news organizations,
and are meant to be
easily shared on social
media, resulting in
confusion over what's
real.
During the recent election
season, there have been reports
of a concerted effort to spread
fake news, in a bid to
influence public opinion.
A recent Stanford University
study of almost 8,000 students
showed they were easily duped
online.
Researchers found, overall,
young people's ability to
reason about the information on
the Internet can be summed
up in one word: bleak.
You have been working on
media literacy for how long?
CLAIRE BEACH, Media Literacy
Advocate: About 40 years.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Claire
Beach is a media literacy
advocate and former teacher.
She says just because kids are
comfortable with social media
doesn't mean they're savvy
about the information
they're consuming.
CLAIRE BEACH: When they're using
their phones, they may know
how to make something work,
but they don't have the
ethical piece, the emotional
intelligence piece.
It's a wilderness out
there for some kids.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She's worked
with lawmakers like Democratic
state Senator Marko Liias
to encourage media literacy
classes in grades K through 12.
MARKO LIIAS (D), Washington
State Senator: I was reading a
stunning statistic that, just
since 2003 to today, humanity
has created more information
than we created in all of
human history up until 2003.
So the pace of information, the
pace of data, the pace of what
our students are being exposed
to is rising exponentially.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: How do you
convince people that this is not
about politics, this is about
critical thinking?
MARKO LIIAS: Both of the
bills that I have passed
have had bipartisan support.
Whether you're a Democrat or
a Republican, right or left,
we want people to go into the
voting booth educated and
prepared to make the best
decision for our communities.
And if people can't
discern fake information
from real information,
that really corrodes
the basic institutions
of our democracy.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The
law in Washington state
encourages educators to
develop policies around
media literacy and
to share resources.
It also allows districts access
to federal technology funding.
This new law in Washington
is being used as a model by
about a dozen other states.
Advocates want to see
media literacy taught
in all 50 states.
JAMES STEYER, Founder and CEO,
Common Sense Media: There's
clearly growing momentum to
pass this kind of legislation.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Jim Steyer
founded Common Sense, one of
several organizations dedicated
to media literacy.
NARRATOR: Here are five
ways to spot fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: They have also
worked with Harvard University
to create free lesson plans
and online resources.
JAMES STEYER: The essence
of media literacy is
critical thinking.
Every child in America needs
those skills, particularly when
they live in this 24/7 media
and technology world,
where they're just
bombarded with information.
Oftentimes, it's inaccurate.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: These students
are in Catherine Sparks' English
class at Edmonds-Woodway High
School.
STUDENT: It's crazy how
many people actually
trust these sources.
STUDENT: You can't distinguish
the difference anymore.
STUDENT: It can
get 1,000 retweets.
It is not even true.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks
uses the play "Hamlet"
to talk about fake news.
CATHERINE SPARKS, Teacher: It's
about spying and lying and how
that creates a ripe environment
for the proliferation
of fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks
has created untrue
stories based on the play.
CATHERINE SPARKS: In act one,
scene two, when he says oh,
but this too, too solid flesh
would melt, thaw and resolve
itself into a dew, sure, it
could be a metaphor, but Hamlet
has a shocking
flesh-eating illness.
(LAUGHTER)
CATHERINE SPARKS: Could you
actually support that with
evidence from the text?
Good luck.
Fake news is not news
you disagree with.
Fake news is fabricated news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Sparks believes
letting her students create
their own fake news will teach
them how to critically
think through some of the
information they receive.
What words are used?
Who benefits?
Is there any truth to the story?
STUDENT: It's got to be
dramatic, like, absurd things
that you're like, what?
CATHERINE SPARKS: This is
a juicy story right here.
STUDENT: It's
entirely fabricated.
CATHERINE SPARKS: What
would be the outcome of
producing this story?
STUDENT: If the public
saw this, they're like,
oh, my gosh, there's so
much drama and scandal
going on.
CATHERINE SPARKS: What's
been the most painful
about the proliferation
of fake news in the
media is to watch my students
start to distrust everything.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: That's
exactly why state Senator Marko
Liias says media literacy is
so important.
MARKO LIIAS: At its
bedrock, when our founding
fathers created this
country, the reason why
they were so committed to public
education was to make sure that
we had an educated citizenry.
CATHERINE SPARKS: Anything that
starts with "share if you're
outraged," that's a bad sign.
And outrage is just the
lifeblood of fake news.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Education Week,
I'm Kavitha Cardoza in Seattle,
Washington.